Text classification is still one of the major information retrieval problems, and developing robust and accurate classification
models continues to be in great need as a consequence of the increasing complexity and scale of current application scenarios,
such as the Web. The task of Automatic Text Classification (ATC) aims at creating models that associate documents with semantically
meaningful categories. One of the key tasks to be performed for effective ATC is to properly represent textual data, being such a task
the main focus of this project.

Textual data representation is an interesting and challenging task whose main objective is to represent textual documents in a vector space
better suitable for learning automatic classifiers. Such task, also known as textual feature extraction, supports the ATC task by not only
improving classification effectiveness but also efficiency, since it allow us to represent data in lower dimensional spaces.
Common strategies for feature extraction include hand engineering features based on raw textual data as well as learning how
to represent data for the specific task of automatic classification. Clearly, the process of handcrafting textual features not
only involves domain specific knowledge but is also a lenghty and probably sub-optimal strategy. Such a challenge calls for
automatic and more informed solutions, such as using machine learning strategies to this end. The process of representing textual
data could thus take the advantages of learning algorithms to learn better textual representations from a training set
that optimizes for class separability in a fully automated fashion.

Roughly speaking, one could represent documents based on distributional representation, which usually involves domain specific
knowledge where representation is based on word ocurrence patterns and contextual information to come up with vectorial text
representations, e.g., Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) and its probabilistic counterpart (pLSA) as well as Latent Semantic Analysis(LSA).
Furthermore, one could represent textual data using distributed representations whose goal is to encode a document as a compact,
dense and lower dimensional vector with the semantic meaning of the document distributed along the dimensions of the vector.
This strategy includes network-based distributed representation models that has shown to outperform distributional strategies
in terms of classification effectiveness.

We here explore deep learning strategies to come up with better textual data representations for more effective ATC. The key aspect of
deep learning strategies is that such models are able to learn latent representations that are not designed by human engineers: they
are learned from data using a general purpose learning procedure. Deep learning requires very little engineering by hand, so it can
easily take advantage of the increase in the amount of available computation and data.

Currently, strategies based on deep learning for text representation includes autoencoders, restricted Boltzmann models,
deep belief networks, convolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks, to name a few. Those strategies typically
converts spatial vectors of high-dimensional, sparse short texts into new, lower-dimensional, substantive feature spaces by using deep
neural networks. As we shall see, we here focus on autoencoders, a special type of neural network as described below.

An autoencoder, firstly introduced in Rumelhart et al. [72], is a feedforward network that can learn a compressed, distributed
representation of data, usually with the goal of dimensionality reduction or manifold learning. An autoencoder architecture is built, in its
simplest form, by three layers, the input and output layers (with same dimensionality) and a hidden layer between them (the bottleneck layer)
which usually has a more compact representation than the input and output layers (i.e., with fewer units than input or output layer). The learning
goal of such an architecture is to learn a identity function that is able to reconstruct the input data after a low dimensional transformation.
In other words, the training process of an autoencoder is the same as traditional neural networks with backpropagation---it aims at reducing a loss---with
the only difference being that such a loss function is given by the difference observed between the input and its reconstruction given by the output layer.

A stacked autoencoder is the deep counterpart of an autoencoder and it can be built simply by stacking up layers. For every layer,
its input is the learned representation of its former layer and it learns a more compact representation of the existing learned
representation. A stacked sparse autoencoder, discussed by Gravelines et al. [74], is a form of stacked autoencoder where sparsity
regularizations are introduced into the autoencoder to learn a sparse representation. A stacked denoising autoencoder, introduced
by (Vincent et al. [75]) is an autoencoder where some noise is introduced into the data fed to the input layer while the data at output
layer stays the same, which is shown to produce autoencoders with better generalization capabilities [1].

We propose a variation of an autoencoder architecture for better text representations on the vector space model that
is able to extract features on different levels of abstraction, by means of a hierarchical architecture of autoencoders. Unlike previous
autoencoder architectures (such as regular and stacked autoencoders), our proposed hierarchical autoencoder is able to explicitly
capture multiple levels of representations that correspond to different levels of abstraction, thus forming a hierarchy of concepts, that are
optimized for class separability at all levels.

[IMAGE HERE]

Our main hypothesis is that capturing different levels of abstraction when
representing textual data improves the quality of representation in terms of generalization---thus favoring classification effectiveness---,
but also favors


learn multiple levels of representations that correspond to different levels of abstraction; the levels form a hierarchy of concepts.
high-level abstractions of the inputs, and bringing better generalization.




In reference [76], for the characteristics of short texts, a feature extraction and clustering algorithm based on deep noise autoencoder is brought forward. This algorithm converts spatial vectors of high-dimensional, sparse short texts into new, lower-dimensional, substantive feature spaces by using deep learning network. According to experimental results, applying extractive text features to short text clustering significantly improves clustering effect and efficiently addresses high-dimensional and sparse short text space vectors. In reference [77], it is put forward by using sparse autoencoder of “deep learning” to automatically extract text features and combining deep belief networks to form SD (standard deviation) algorithm to classify texts. Experiments show that in the situation of fewer training sets, classification performance of SD algorithm is lower than that of traditional SVM (support vector machine), but when processing high-dimensional data, SD algorithm has a higher accuracy rate and recall rate than that compared with SVM. In reference [78], this paper presents the use of unsupervised pre-training using autoencoder with deep ConvNet in order to recognize handwritten Bangla digits. The proposed approach achieves 99.50% accuracy, which is so far the best for recognizing handwritten Bangla digits. In reference [79], human motion data is high-dimensional time-series data, and it usually contains measurement error and noise. In experiments, we compared the using of the row data and three types of feature extraction methods—principal component analysis, a shallow sparse autoencoder, and a deep sparse autoencoder—for pattern recognition [79]. The proposed method, application of a deep sparse autoencoder, thus enabled higher recognition accuracy, better generalization, and more stability than that which could be achieved with the other methods [79].


